I could not help laughing at the ease with which he explained his
process of deduction. "When I hear you give your reasons," I
remarked, "the thing always appears to me to be so ridiculously
simple that I could easily do it myself, though at each
successive instance of your reasoning I am baffled until you
explain your process. And yet I believe that my eyes are as good
as yours." "Quite so," he answered, lighting a cigarette, and throwing
himself down into an armchair. "You see, but you do not observe.
The distinction is clear. For example, you have frequently seen
the steps which lead up from the hall to this room."$A

The note was undated, and without either signature or address.
"There will call upon you to-night, at a quarter to eight
o'clock," it said, "a gentleman who desires to consult you upon a
matter of the very deepest moment. Your recent services to one of
the royal houses of Europe have shown that you are one who may
safely be trusted with matters which are of an importance which
can hardly be exaggerated. This account of you we have from all
quarters received. Be in your chamber then at that hour, and do
not take it amiss if your visitor wear a mask." "This is indeed
a mystery," I remarked. "What do you imagine that it means?"$A

It was close upon four before the door opened, and a
drunken-looking groom, ill-kempt and side-whiskered, with an
inflamed face and disreputable clothes, walked into the room.
Accustomed as I was to my friend's amazing powers in the use of
disguises, I had to look three times before I was certain that it
was indeed he. With a nod he vanished into the bedroom, whence he
emerged in five minutes tweed-suited and respectable, as of old.
Putting his hands into his pockets, he stretched out his legs in
front of the fire and laughed heartily for some minutes.
"Well, really!" he cried, and then he choked and laughed again
until he was obliged to lie back, limp and helpless, in the
chair. "What is it?"$A

We made our way downstairs as quietly as possible, and out into
the bright morning sunshine. In the road stood our horse and
trap, with the half-clad stable-boy waiting at the head. We both
sprang in, and away we dashed down the London Road. A few country
carts were stirring, bearing in vegetables to the metropolis, but
the lines of villas on either side were as silent and lifeless as
some city in a dream."It has been in some points a singular case," said Holmes,
flicking the horse on into a gallop. "I confess that I have been
as blind as a mole, but it is better to learn wisdom late than
never to learn it at all."$A

"Well, when I called last week I was shown into the little office
as usual, but I found that Miss Stoper was not alone. A
prodigiously stout man with a very smiling face and a great heavy
chin which rolled down in fold upon fold over his throat sat at
her elbow with a pair of glasses on his nose, looking very
earnestly at the ladies who entered. As I came in he gave quite a
jump in his chair and turned quickly to Miss Stoper.
"'That will do,' said he; 'I could not ask for anything better.
Capital! capital!' He seemed quite enthusiastic and rubbed his
hands together in the most genial fashion. He was such a
comfortable-looking man that it was quite a pleasure to look at
him.
"'You are looking for a situation, miss?' he asked.
"'Yes, sir.'
"'As governess?'
"'Yes, sir.'
"'And what salary do you ask?'
"'I had 4 pounds a month in my last place with Colonel Spence
Munro.'$A

"I am sure we owe you an apology, Mrs. Toller," said Holmes, "for
you have certainly cleared up everything which puzzled us. And
here comes the country surgeon and Mrs. Rucastle, so I think,
Watson, that we had best escort Miss Hunter back to Winchester,
as it seems to me that our locus standi now is rather a
questionable one."
And thus was solved the mystery of the sinister house with the
copper beeches in front of the door. Mr. Rucastle survived, but
was always a broken man, kept alive solely through the care of
his devoted wife. They still live with their old servants, who
probably know so much of Rucastle's past life that he finds it
difficult to part from them. Mr. Fowler and Miss Rucastle were
married, by special license, in Southampton the day after their
flight, and he is now the holder of a government appointment in
the island of Mauritius. As to Miss Violet Hunter, my friend
Holmes, rather to my disappointment, manifested no further
interest in her when once she had ceased to be the centre of one
of his problems, and she is now the head of a private school at
Walsall, where I believe that she has met with considerable success.$A

nigh the tail, and, like a restless needle sojourning in the body of a man,
travelled full forty feet, and at last was found imbedded in the hump.
Crossing this dusky entry, and on through yon low-arched way --cut through
what in old times must have been a great central chimney with fire-places all
round --you enter the public room.  A still duskier place is this, with such
low ponderous beams above, and such old wrinkled planks beneath, that you
would almost fancy you trod some old craft's cockpits, especially of such a
howling night, when this corner-anchored old ark rocked so furiously.  On one
side stood a long, low, shelf-like table covered with cracked glass cases,
filled with dusty rarities gathered from this wide world's remotest nooks.
Projecting from the further angle of the room stands a dark-looking den --the
bar-- a rude attempt at a right whale's head.  Be that how it may, there
stands the vast arched bone of the whale's jaw, so wide, a coach might
almost drive beneath it.  within are shabby shelves, ranged round with old
decanters, bottles, flasks; and in those jaws of swift destruction, like
another cursed Jonah (by which name indeed they called him), bustles a
little withered old man, who, for their money, dearly sells the sailors
deliriums and death.  Abominable are the tumblers into which he pours his
poison.  Though true cylinders without --within, the villanous green goggling
glasses deceitfully tapered downwards to a cheating bottom.  Parallel
meridians rudely pecked into the glass, surround these footpads' goblets.
Fill to this mark, and your charge is but a penny; to this a penny more;$H

towards the land of Nod, when I heard a heavy footfall in the passage, and
saw a glimmer of light come into the room from under the door.  Lord save me,
thinks I, that must be the harpooneer, the infernal head-peddler.  But I lay
perfectly still, and resolved not to say a word till spoken to.  Holding a
light in one hand, and that identical New Zealand head in the other, the
stranger entered the room, and without looking towards the bed, placed his
candle a good way off from me on the floor in one corner, and then began
working away at the knotted cords of the large bag I before spoke of as being
in the room.  I was all eagerness to see his face, but he kept it averted for
some time while employed in unlacing the bag's mouth.  This accomplished,
however, he turned round --when, good heavens!  what a sight!  Such a face!  It
was of a dark purplish, yellow color, here and there stuck over with large,
blackish looking squares.  Yes, it's just as I thought, he's a terrible
bedfellow; he's been in a fight, got dreadfully cut, and here he is, just
from the surgeon.  But at that moment he chanced to turn his face so towards
the light, that I plainly saw they could not be sticking-plasters at all,
.. <p 21 >$H

Ain't that queer, now?  But there's no telling, it's the old game --Here goes
for a snooze.  Damn me, it's worth a fellow's while to be born into the
world, if only to fall right asleep.  And now that I think of it, that's
about the first thing babies do, and that's a sort of queer, too.  Damn me,
but all things are queer, come to think of 'em.  But that's against my
principles.  Think not, is my eleventh commandment; and sleep when you can,
is my twelfth -- So here goes again.  But how's that?  didn't he call me a dog?
blazes!  he called me ten times a donkey, and piled a lot of jackasses on
top of that!  He might as well have kicked me, and done with it.  Maybe he
     did kick me, and I didn't observe it, I was so taken all aback with his brow,
somehow.  It flashed like a bleached bone.  What the devil's the matter with
me?  I don't stand right on my legs.  Coming afoul of that old man has a sort
of turned me wrong side out.  By the Lord, I must have been dreaming, though
--How?  how?  how? --but the only way's$H

"Mr. Holmes," said the vicar in an agitated voice, "the most extraordinary and tragic
affair has occurred during the night. It is the most unheard-of business. We can only
regard it as a special Providence that you should chance to be here at the time, for in
 all England you are the one man we need."
I glared at the intrusive vicar with no very friendly eyes; but Holmes took his pipe
from his lips and sat up in his chair like an old hound who hears the view-halloa. He
waved his hand to the sofa, and our palpitating visitor with his agitated companion sat
side by side upon it. Mr. Mortimer Tregennis was more self-contained than the clergyman,
 but the twitching of his thin hands and the brightness of his dark eyes showed that they
  shared a common emotion.
"Shall I speak or you?" he asked of the vicar.
"Well, as you seem to have made the discovery, whatever it may be, and the vicar to have
had it second-hand, perhaps you had better do the speaking," said Holmes.$A

"None whatever."
"But the cause remains as obscure as before. Come into the arbour here and let us discuss
 it together. That villainous stuff seems still to linger round my throat. I think we must
  admit that all the evidence points to this man, Mortimer Tregennis, having been the criminal
   in the first tragedy, though he was the victim in the second one. We must remember, in the
   first place, that there is some story of a family quarrel, followed by a reconciliation. How
bitter that quarrel may have been, or how hollow the reconciliation we cannot tell. When I
think of Mortimer Tregennis, with the foxy face and the small shrewd, beady eyes behind the
spectacles, he is not a man whom I should judge to be of a particularly forgiving disposition.
Well, in the next place, you will remember that this idea of someone moving in the garden, which
took our attention for a moment from the real cause of the tragedy, emanated from him. He had a
motive in misleading us. Finally, if he did not throw the substance into the fire at the moment
of leaving the room, who did do so? The affair happened immediately after his departure. Had anyone
else come in, the family would certainly have risen from the table. Besides, in peaceful Cornwall,
visitors did not arrive after ten o'clock at night. We may take it, then, that all the evidence
points to Mortimer Tregennis as the culprit."$A

"Certainly not," I answered.
"I have never loved, Watson, but if I did and if the woman I loved had met such an end, I might
act even as our lawless lion-hunter has done. Who knows? Well, Watson, I will not offend your
intelligence by explaining what is obvious. The gravel upon the window-sill was, of course, the
starting-point of my research. It was unlike anything in the vicarage garden. Only when my attention
had been drawn to Dr. Sterndale and his cottage did I find its counterpart. The lamp shining in broad
daylight and the remains of powder upon the shield were successive links in a fairly obvious chain.
And now, my dear Watson, I think we may dismiss the matter from our mind and go back with a clear
conscience to the study of those Chaldean roots which are surely to be traced in the Cornish branch
of the great Celtic speech."$A

When I removed into the country, it was to occupy an old-fashioned
farm-house, which had no piazza--a deficiency the more regretted,
because not only did I like piazzas, as somehow combining the coziness
of in-doors with the freedom of out-doors, and it is so pleasant to
inspect your thermometer there, but the country round about was such a
picture, that in berry time no boy climbs hill or crosses vale without
coming upon easels planted in every nook, and sun-burnt painters
painting there. A very paradise of painters. The circle of the stars cut
by the circle of the mountains. At least, so looks it from the house;
though, once upon the mountains, no circle of them can you see. Had the
site been chosen five rods off, this charmed ring would not have been.$H

At length, when pretty well again, and sitting out, in the September
morning, upon the piazza, and thinking to myself, when, just after a
little flock of sheep, the farmer's banded children passed, a-nutting,
and said, "How sweet a day"--it was, after all, but what their fathers
call a weather-breeder--and, indeed, was become so sensitive through my
illness, as that I could not bear to look upon a Chinese creeper of my
adoption, and which, to my delight, climbing a post of the piazza, had
burst out in starry bloom, but now, if you removed the leaves a little,
showed millions of strange, cankerous worms, which, feeding upon those
blossoms, so shared their blessed hue, as to make it unblessed
evermore--worms, whose germs had doubtless lurked in the very bulb
which, so hopefully, I had planted: in this ingrate peevishness of my
weary convalescence, was I sitting there; when, suddenly looking off, I
saw the golden mountain-window, dazzling like a deep-sea dolphin.
Fairies there, thought I, once more; the queen of fairies at her
fairy-window; at any rate, some glad mountain-girl; it will do me good,
it will cure this weariness, to look on her. No more; I'll launch my
yawl--ho, cheerly, heart! and push away for fairy-land--for rainbow's
end, in fairy-land.$H

My horse hitched low his head. Red apples rolled before him; Eve's
apples; seek-no-furthers. He tasted one, I another; it tasted of the
ground. Fairy land not yet, thought I, flinging my bridle to a humped
old tree, that crooked out an arm to catch it. For the way now lay where
path was none, and none might go but by himself, and only go by daring.
Through blackberry brakes that tried to pluck me back, though I but
strained towards fruitless growths of mountain-laurel; up slippery
steeps to barren heights, where stood none to welcome. Fairy land not
yet, thought I, though the morning is here before me.$H

"Why not adjourn to the cuddy," said Captain Delano; "there is more air
there." But the host sat silent and motionless.
Meantime his servant knelt before him, with a large fan of feathers. And
Francesco coming in on tiptoes, handed the negro a little cup of
aromatic waters, with which at intervals he chafed his master's brow;
smoothing the hair along the temples as a nurse does a child's. He spoke
no word. He only rested his eye on his master's, as if, amid all Don
Benito's distress, a little to refresh his spirit by the silent sight
of fidelity.
Presently the ship's bell sounded two o'clock; and through the cabin
windows a slight rippling of the sea was discerned; and from the desired
direction.$H

Presently, his foot, in the first act of descent into the boat, pressed
the first round of the side-ladder, his face presented inward upon the
deck. In the same moment, he heard his name courteously sounded; and, to
his pleased surprise, saw Don Benito advancing--an unwonted energy in
his air, as if, at the last moment, intent upon making amends for his
recent discourtesy. With instinctive good feeling, Captain Delano,
withdrawing his foot, turned and reciprocally advanced. As he did so,
the Spaniard's nervous eagerness increased, but his vital energy failed;
so that, the better to support him, the servant, placing his master's
hand on his naked shoulder, and gently holding it there, formed himself
into a sort of crutch.
When the two captains met, the Spaniard again fervently took the hand of
the American, at the same time casting an earnest glance into his eyes,
but, as before, too much overcome to speak.$H

There, I hear him come down the companion, and he has locked himself up
in his room, which shows that he is still in an unamiable mood. And so
to bed, as old Pepys would say, for the candle is burning down (we have
to use them now since the nights are closing in), and the steward has
turned in, so there are no hopes of another one.
September 12th.--Calm, clear day, and still lying in the same position.
What wind there is comes from the south-east, but it is very slight.
Captain is in a better humour, and apologised to me at breakfast for his
rudeness. He still looks somewhat distrait, however, and retains that
wild look in his eyes which in a Highlander would mean that he was
“fey”--at least so our chief engineer remarked to me, and he has some
reputation among the Celtic portion of our crew as a seer and expounder
of omens.$A

The storm of emotion which had passed through him, and the mental shock
which he had undergone, would have sent many a man into a raging fever,
but John was too strong-willed and too practical to allow his strength
to be wasted at the very time when he needed it most. Within a few days
he realised a portion of his property, and starting for New York, caught
the first mail steamer to England. Day and night, night and day, he
trod the quarter-deck, until the hardy sailors watched the old man with
astonishment, and marvelled how any human being could do so much upon
so little sleep. It was only by this unceasing exercise, by wearing
down his vitality until fatigue brought lethargy, that he could prevent
himself from falling into a very frenzy of despair. He hardly dared ask
himself what was the object of this wild journey? What did he expect?
Would Mary be still alive? She must be a very old woman. If he could but
see her and mingle his tears with hers he would be content. Let her
only know that it had been no fault of his, and that they had both been
victims to the same cruel fate. The cottage was her own, and she had
said that she would wait for him there until she heard from him. Poor
lass, she had never reckoned on such a wait as this.$A

“In the depths of these wilds there stood a stone building which had
once been a farm-house, but having been for some reason abandoned had
fallen into ruin, and had now become the headquarters of Cade and
his men. A large cowhouse near the farm had been utilised as sleeping
quarters, and some rough attempts had been made to shield the principal
room of the main building from the weather by stopping up the gaping
apertures in the walls. In this apartment was spread out a rough meal
for the returning rebels, and our hero was thrown, still bound, into an
empty outhouse, there to await his fate.”
Sir Walter had been listening with the greatest impatience to Bulwer
Lytton’s narrative, but when it had reached this point he broke in
impatiently.$A

JOHN BARRINGTON COWLES.
It might seem rash of me to say that I ascribe the death of my poor
friend, John Barrington Cowles, to any preternatural agency. I am aware
that in the present state of public feeling a chain of evidence would
require to be strong indeed before the possibility of such a conclusion
could be admitted.
I shall therefore merely state the circumstances which led up to this
sad event as concisely and as plainly as I can, and leave every reader
to draw his own deductions. Perhaps there may be some one who can throw
light upon what is dark to me.
I first met Barrington Cowles when I went up to Edinburgh University to
take out medical classes there. My landlady in Northumberland Street
had a large house, and, being a widow without children, she gained a
livelihood by providing accommodation for several students.$A

Barrington Cowles thanked me, and the conversation drifted off into
other channels. For several days neither of us made any allusion to
the subject, though my companion was perhaps a little more dreamy
and distraught than usual. The incident had almost vanished from my
remembrance, when one day young Brodie, who is a second cousin of mine,
came up to me on the university steps with the face of a bearer of
tidings.
“I say,” he began, “you know Reeves, don’t you?”
“Yes. What of him?”
“His engagement is off.”
“Off!” I cried. “Why, I only learned the other day that it was on.”
“Oh, yes--it’s all off. His brother told me so. Deucedly mean of Reeves,
you know, if he has backed out of it, for she was an uncommonly nice
girl.”
“I’ve seen her,” I said; “but I don’t know her name.”
“She is a Miss Northcott, and lives with an old aunt of hers in
Abercrombie Place. Nobody knows anything about her people, or where she
comes from. Anyhow, she is about the most unlucky girl in the world,
poor soul!”
“Why unlucky?”$A


We had secured one of the side boxes, and did not arrive until after the
performance had begun. I had hardly taken my seat before I recognised
Barrington Cowles, with his fiancee and old Mrs. Merton, sitting in the
third or fourth row of the stalls. They caught sight of me at almost
the same moment, and we bowed to each other. The first portion of the
lecture was somewhat commonplace, the lecturer giving tricks of pure
legerdemain, with one or two manifestations of mesmerism, performed
upon a subject whom he had brought with him. He gave us an exhibition of
clairvoyance too, throwing his subject into a trance, and then demanding
particulars as to the movements of absent friends, and the whereabouts
of hidden objects all of which appeared to be answered satisfactorily.
I had seen all this before, however. What I wanted to see now was the
effect of the lecturer’s will when exerted upon some independent member
of the audience.$A

I walked round with Cowles in order to see the ladies home. He walked in
front with Mrs. Merton, and I found myself behind with the young lady.
For a minute or so I walked beside her without making any remark, and
then I suddenly blurted out, in a manner which must have seemed somewhat
brusque to her--
“You did that, Miss Northcott.”
“Did what?” she asked sharply.
“Why, mesmerised the mesmeriser--I suppose that is the best way of
describing the transaction.”
“What a strange idea!” she said, laughing. “You give me credit for a
strong will then?”
“Yes,” I said. “For a dangerously strong one.”
“Why dangerous?” she asked, in a tone of surprise.$A

CHAPTER I. — Maramma
We were now voyaging straight for Maramma; where lived and reigned,
in mystery, the High Pontiff of the adjoining isles: prince, priest,
and god, in his own proper person: great lord paramount over many kings in Mardi;
his hands full of scepters and crosiers.
Soon, rounding a lofty and insulated shore, the great central peak
of the island came in sight; domineering over the neighboring hills;
the same aspiring pinnacle, descried in drawing near the archipelago in the Chamois.
"Tall Peak of Ofo!" cried Babbalanja, "how comes it that thy shadow so broods over
Mardi; flinging new shades upon spots already shaded by the hill-sides; shade upon shade!"
"Yet, so it is," said Yoomy, sadly, "that where that shadow falls, gay flowers refuse to
spring; and men long dwelling therein become shady of face and of soul. 'Hast thou come
from out the shadows of Ofo?' inquires the stranger, of one with a clouded brow."
"It was by this same peak," said Mohi, "that the nimble god Roo, a great sinner
above, came down from the skies, a very long time ago. Three skips and a jump,
and he landed on the plain. But alas, poor Roo! though easy the descent, there was no climbing back."
"No wonder, then," said Babbalanja, "that the peak is inaccessible to man. Though, with a strange
infatuation, many still make pilgrimages thereto; and wearily climb and climb, till slipping from
the rocks, they fall headlong backward, and oftentimes perish at its base."
"Ay," said Mohi, "in vain, on all sides of the Peak, various paths are tried;
in vain new ones are cut through the cliffs and the brambles:— Ofo yet remains inaccessible."$H

As we here reclined, there came up from the sea-side a party of pilgrims, but newly arrived.
Apprised of their coming, Pani and his child went out to meet them; and standing in the path
 he cried, "I am the appointed guide; in the name of Alma I conduct all pilgrims to the temples."
"This must be the worthy Pani," said one of the strangers, turning upon the rest.
"Let us take him, then, for our guide," cried they; and all drew near.
But upon accosting him; they were told, that he guided none without recompense.
And now, being informed, that the foremost of the pilgrims was one Divino, a
wealthy chief of a distant island, Pani demanded of him his requital.
But the other demurred; and by many soft speeches at length abated the
recompense to three promissory cocoanuts, which he covenanted to send Pani at some future day.
The next pilgrim accosted, was a sad-eyed maiden, in decent but scanty raiment; who without
seeking to diminish Pani's demands promptly placed in his hands a small hoard of the money of Mardi.
"Take it, holy guide," she said, "it is all I have." $H

"No, no, don't call it a pose.  A pose is an artificial thing. This is
quite natural.  I am a born sportsman.  I enjoy it."
"Well, that makes it the more effective.  You yacht against them, you
hunt with them, you play polo, you match them in every game, your
four-in-hand takes the prize at Olympia.  I have even heard that you go
the length of boxing with the young officers.  What is the result?
Nobody takes you seriously.  You are a 'good old sport' 'quite a decent
fellow for a German,' a hard-drinking, night-club, knock-about-town,
devil-may-care young fellow.  And all the time this quiet country house
of yours is the centre of half the mischief in England, and the
sporting squire the most astute secret-service man in Europe.  Genius,
my dear Von Bork--genius!"$A

"May I offer you a glass before your journey?"
"No, thanks.  But it looks like revelry."
"Altamont has a nice taste in wines, and he took a fancy to my Tokay.
He is a touchy fellow and needs humouring in small things.  I have to
study him, I assure you."  They had strolled out on to the terrace
again, and along it to the further end where at a touch from the
Baron's chauffeur the great car shivered and chuckled.  "Those are the
lights of Harwich, I suppose," said the secretary, pulling on his dust
coat.  "How still and peaceful it all seems.  There may be other lights
within the week, and the English coast a less tranquil place! The
heavens, too, may not be quite so peaceful if all that the good Zepplin
promises us comes true.  By the way, who is that?"$A

The American held the small parcel in his hand, but made no motion to
give it up.
"What about the dough?" he asked.
"The what?"
"The boodle.  The reward.  The 500 pounds.  The gunner turned damned
nasty at the last, and I had to square him with an extra hundred
dollars or it would have been nitsky for you and me. 'Nothin' doin'!'
says he, and he meant it, too, but the last hundred did it.  It's cost
me two hundred pound from first to last, so it isn't likely I'd give it
up without gettin' my wad."$A

The two friends chatted in intimate converse for a few minutes,
recalling once again the days of the past, while their prisoner vainly
wriggled to undo the bonds that held him.  As they turned to the car
Holmes pointed back to the moonlit sea and shook a thoughtful head.
"There's an east wind coming, Watson."
"I think not, Holmes.  It is very warm."
"Good old Watson!  You are the one fixed point in a changing age.
There's an east wind coming all the same, such a wind as never blew on
England yet.  It will be cold and bitter, Watson, and a good many of us
may wither before its blast.  But it's God's own wind none the less,
and a cleaner, better, stronger land will lie in the sunshine when the
storm has cleared.  Start her up, Watson, for it's time that we were on
our way.  I have a check for five hundred pounds which should be cashed
early, for the drawer is quite capable of stopping it if he can."$A

Behold me, then, turning the rusty old key, and going up, alone, into
the haunted garret. It embraced the entire area of the mansion. Its
ceiling was formed by the roof, showing the rafters and boards on
which the slates were laid. The roof shedding the water four ways from
a high point in the centre, the space beneath was much like that of
a general's marquee--only midway broken by a labyrinth of timbers,
for braces, from which waved innumerable cobwebs, that, of a summer's
noon, shone like Bagdad tissues and gauzes. On every hand, some strange
insect was seen, flying, or running, or creeping, on rafter and floor.$H

In these fancies, my wife, for one, took little interest. She
disrelished the idea of so unfashionable and indigent-looking a
stranger as the table intruding into the polished society of more
prosperous furniture. But when, after seeking its fortune at the
cabinet-maker's, the table came home, varnished over, bright as a
guinea, no one exceeded my wife in a gracious reception of it. It was
advanced to an honorable position in the cedar-parlor.
But, as for my daughter Julia, she never got over her strange emotions
upon first accidentally encountering the table. Unfortunately, it was
just as I was in the act of bringing it down from the garret. Holding
it by the slab, I was carrying it before me, one cobwebbed hoof thrust
out, which weird object at a turn of the stairs, suddenly touched my
girl, as she was ascending; whereupon, turning, and seeing no living
creature--for I was quite hidden behind my shield--seeing nothing
indeed, but the apparition of the Evil One's foot, as it seemed, she
cried out, and there is no knowing what might have followed, had I not
immediately spoken.$H

It was late on a Saturday night in December. In the little old
cedar-parlor, before the little old apple-tree table, I was sitting
up, as usual, alone. I had made more than one effort to get up and go
to bed; but I could not. I was, in fact, under a sort of fascination.
Somehow, too, certain reasonable opinions of mine, seemed not so
reasonable as before. I felt nervous. The truth was, that though, in
my previous night-readings, Cotton Mather had but amused me, upon
this particular night he terrified me. A thousand times I had laughed
at such stories. Old wives' fables, I thought, however entertaining.
But now, how different. They began to put on the aspect of reality.
Now, for the first time it struck me that this was no romantic
Mrs. Radcliffe, who had written the _Magnalia_; but a practical,
hard-working, earnest, upright man, a learned doctor, too, as well
as a good Christian and orthodox clergyman. What possible motive
could such a man have to deceive? His style had all the plainness
and unpoetic boldness of truth. In the most straightforward way, he
laid before me detailed accounts of New England witchcraft, each
important item corroborated by respectable townsfolk, and, of not a
few of the most surprising, he himself had been eye-witness. Cotton
Mather testified himself whereof he had seen. But, is it possible? I
asked myself. Then I remembered that Dr. Johnson, the matter-of-fact
compiler of a dictionary, had been a believer in ghosts, besides many
other sound, worthy men. Yielding to the fascination, I read deeper and
deeper into the night. At last, I found myself starting at the least
chance sound, and yet wishing that it were not so very still.$H

"Bug?" screamed Julia, "Good heavens, papa!"
"I hope sir, you have been bringing no bugs into this house," said my
wife, severely.
"The bug, the bug!" I cried; "the bug under the tumbler."
"Bugs in tumblers!" cried the girls; "not _our_ tumblers, papa? You
have not been putting bugs into our tumblers? Oh, what does--what
_does_ it all mean?"
"Do you see this hole, this crack here?" said I, putting my finger on
the spot.
"That I do," said my wife, with high displeasure. "And how did it come
there? What have you been doing to the table?"
"Do you see this crack?" repeated I, intensely.
"Yes, yes," said Julia; "that was what frightened me so; it looks so
like witch-work."
"Spirits! spirits!" cried Anna.$H

"You fools!" cried my wife, "it's the baker with the bread."
Six o'clock.
She went to throw back the shutters, but ere it was done, a cry came
from Julia. There, half in and half out its crack, there wriggled the
bug, flashing in the room's general dimness, like a fiery opal.
Had this bug had a tiny sword by its side--a Damascus sword--and a
tiny necklace round its neck--a diamond necklace--and a tiny gun in
its claw--brass gun--and a tiny manuscript in its mouth--a Chaldee
manuscript--Julia and Anna could not have stood more charmed.
In truth, it was a beautiful bug--a Jew jeweler's bug--a bug like a
sparkle of a glorious sunset.
Julia and Anna had never dreamed of such a bug. To them, bug had been
a word synonymous with hideousness. But this was a seraphical bug; or
rather, all it had of the bug was the B, for it was beautiful as a
butterfly.
Julia and Anna gazed and gazed. They were no more alarmed. They were
delighted.$H

Now, it is that blackness in Hawthorne, of which I have spoken that
so fixes and fascinates me. It may be, nevertheless, that it is too
largely developed in him. Perhaps he does not give us a ray of light
for every shade of his dark. But however this may be, this blackness
it is that furnishes the infinite obscure of his background,--that
background, against which Shakspeare plays his grandest conceits,
the things that have made for Shakspeare his loftiest but most
circumscribed renown, as the profoundest of thinkers. For by
philosophers Shakspeare is not adored, as the great man of tragedy
and comedy:--"Off with his head; so much for Buckingham!" This sort
of rant interlined by another hand, brings down the house,--those
mistaken souls, who dream of Shakespeare as a mere man of Richard the
Third humps and Macbeth daggers. But it is those deep far-away things
in him; those occasional flashings-forth of the intuitive Truth in
him; those short, quick probings at the very axis of reality;--these
are the things that make Shakspeare, Shakspeare. Through the mouths of
the dark characters of Hamlet, Timon, Lear, and Iago, he craftily says,
or sometimes insinuates the things which we feel to be so terrifically
true, that it were all but madness for any good man, in his own proper
character, to utter, or even hint of them. Tormented into desperation,
Lear, the frantic king, tears off the mask, and speaks the same
madness of vital truth.$H

But, as I before said, it is the least part of
genius that attracts admiration. And so, much of the blind, unbridled
admiration that has been heaped upon Shakspeare, has been lavished
upon the least part of him. And few of his endless commentators and
critics seem to have remembered, or even perceived, that the immediate
products of a great mind are not so great as that undeveloped and
sometimes undevelopable yet dimly-discernible greatness, to which those
immediate products are but the infallible indices. In Shakspeare's
tomb lies infinitely more than Shakspeare ever wrote. And if I magnify
Shakspeare, it is not so much for what he did do as for what he did
not do, or refrained from doing. For in this world of lies, Truth is
forced to fly like a scared white doe in the woodlands; and only by
cunning glimpses will she reveal herself, as in Shakspeare and other
masters of the great Art of Telling the Truth,--even though it be
covertly and by snatches.$H

Once more--for it is hard to be finite upon an infinite subject, and
all subjects are infinite. By some people this entire scrawl of mine
may be esteemed altogether unnecessary, inasmuch "as years ago" (they
may say) "we found out the rich and rare stuff in this Hawthorne, who
you now parade forth, as if only you _yourself_ were the discoverer
of this Portuguese diamond in your literature." But even granting all
this--and adding to it, the assumption that the books of Hawthorne have
sold by the five thousand,--what does that signify? They should be sold
by the hundred thousand; and read by the million; and admired by every
one who is capable of admiration.$H

"Well, that makes it the more effective.  You yacht against them, you
hunt with them, you play polo, you match them in every game, your
four-in-hand takes the prize at Olympia.  I have even heard that you go
the length of boxing with the young officers.  What is the result?
Nobody takes you seriously.  You are a 'good old sport' 'quite a decent
fellow for a German,' a hard-drinking, night-club, knock-about-town,
devil-may-care young fellow.  And all the time this quiet country house
of yours is the centre of half the mischief in England, and the
sporting squire the most astute secret-service man in Europe.  Genius,
my dear Von Bork--genius!"$A

"Altamont has a nice taste in wines, and he took a fancy to my Tokay.
He is a touchy fellow and needs humouring in small things.  I have to
study him, I assure you."  They had strolled out on to the terrace
again, and along it to the further end where at a touch from the
Baron's chauffeur the great car shivered and chuckled.  "Those are the
lights of Harwich, I suppose," said the secretary, pulling on his dust
coat.  "How still and peaceful it all seems.  There may be other lights
within the week, and the English coast a less tranquil place! The
heavens, too, may not be quite so peaceful if all that the good Zepplin
promises us comes true.  By the way, who is that?"
Only one window showed a light behind them; in it there stood a lamp,
and beside it, seated at a table, was a dear old ruddy-faced woman in a
country cap.  She was bending over her knitting and stopping
occasionally to stroke a large black cat upon a stool beside her.
"That is Martha, the only servant I have left."
The secretary chuckled.$A

"Ah, I have often marvelled at it myself.  The Foreign Minister alone I
could have withstood, but when the Premier also deigned to visit my
humble roof--!  The fact is, Watson, that this gentleman upon the sofa
was a bit too good for our people.  He was in a class by himself.
Things were going wrong, and no one could understand why they were
going wrong.  Agents were suspected or even caught, but there was
evidence of some strong and secret central force.  It was absolutely
necessary to expose it.  Strong pressure was brought upon me to look
into the matter. It has cost me two years, Watson, but they have not
been devoid of excitement.  When I say that I started my pilgrimage at
Chicago, graduated in an Irish secret society at Buffalo, gave serious
trouble to the constabulary at Skibbareen, and so eventually caught the
eye of a subordinate agent of Von Bork, who recommended me as a likely
man, you will realize that the matter was complex.  Since then I have
been honoured by his confidence, which has not prevented most of his
plans going subtly wrong and five of his best agents being in prison.
I watched them, Watson, and I picked them as they ripened.  Well, sir,
I hope that you are none the worse!"$A

The two friends chatted in intimate converse for a few minutes,
recalling once again the days of the past, while their prisoner vainly
wriggled to undo the bonds that held him.  As they turned to the car
Holmes pointed back to the moonlit sea and shook a thoughtful head.
"There's an east wind coming, Watson."
"I think not, Holmes.  It is very warm."
"Good old Watson!  You are the one fixed point in a changing age.
There's an east wind coming all the same, such a wind as never blew on
England yet.  It will be cold and bitter, Watson, and a good many of us
may wither before its blast.  But it's God's own wind none the less,
and a cleaner, better, stronger land will lie in the sunshine when the
storm has cleared.  Start her up, Watson, for it's time that we were on
our way.  I have a check for five hundred pounds which should be cashed
early, for the drawer is quite capable of stopping it if he can."$A

My story is one which you may well treasure up in your memories, and
tell again to others, for it is not likely that in this whole county of
Hampshire, or even perhaps in all England, there is another left alive
who is so well able to speak from his own knowledge of these events,
or who has played a more forward part in them. All that I know I shall
endeavour soberly and in due order to put before you. I shall try to
make these dead men quicken into life for your behoof, and to call back
out of the mists of the past those scenes which were brisk enough in
the acting, though they read so dully and so heavily in the pages of the
worthy men who have set themselves to record them. Perchance my words,
too, might, in the ears of strangers, seem to be but an old man's
gossip. To you, however, who know that these eyes which are looking at
you looked also at the things which I describe, and that this hand has
struck in for a good cause, it will, I know, be different. Bear in mind
as you listen that it was your quarrel as well as our own in which
we fought, and that if now you grow up to be free men in a free land,
privileged to think or to pray as your consciences shall direct, you may
thank God that you are reaping the harvest which your fathers sowed in
blood and suffering when the Stuarts were on the throne.$A


Yet for all his self-restraint the old leaven would at times begin to
work in him, and bring on fits of what his enemies would call fanaticism
and his friends piety, though it must be confessed that this piety
was prone to take a fierce and fiery shape. As I look back, one or two
instances of that stand out so hard and clear in my recollection that
they might be scenes which I had seen of late in the playhouse, instead
of memories of my childhood more than threescore years ago, when the
second Charles was on the throne.The first of these occurred when
I was so young that I can remember
neither what went before nor what immediately after it. It stuck in my
infant mind when other things slipped through it. We were all in the
house one sultry summer evening, when there came a rattle of kettledrums
and a clatter of hoofs, which brought my mother and my father to the
door, she with me in her arms that I might have the better view. It was
a regiment of horse on their way from Chichester to Portsmouth, with
colours flying and band playing, making the bravest show that ever my
youthful eyes had rested upon. With what wonder and admiration did I
gaze at the sleek prancing steeds, the steel morions, the plumed hats
of the officers, the scarfs and bandoliers. Never, I thought, had such
a gallant company assembled, and I clapped my hands and cried out in my
delight. My father smiled gravely, and took me from my mother's arms.
'Nay, lad,' he said, 'thou art a soldier's son, and should have more
judgment than to commend such a rabble as this. Canst thou not, child as
thou art, see that their arms are ill-found, their stirrup-irons rusted,
and their ranks without order or cohesion?$A

I tell you these incidents that you may have an idea of the fierce and
earnest religion which filled not only your own ancestor, but most of
those men who were trained in the parliamentary armies. In many ways
they were more like those fanatic Saracens, who believe in conversion by
the sword, than the followers of a Christian creed. Yet they have this
great merit, that their own lives were for the most part clean and
commendable, for they rigidly adhered themselves to those laws which
they would gladly have forced at the sword's point upon others. It is
true that among so many there were some whose piety was a shell for
their ambition, and others who practised in secret what they denounced
in public, but no cause however good is free from such hypocritical
parasites. That the greater part of the saints, as they termed
themselves, were men of sober and God-fearing lives, may be shown by the
fact that, after the disbanding of the army of the Commonwealth, the old
soldiers flocked into trade throughout the country, and made their mark
wherever they went by their industry and worth. There is many a wealthy
business house now in England which can trace its rise to the thrift and
honesty of some simple pikeman of Ireton or Cromwell.$A

So much for your great-grandfather, Ironside Joe. I have preferred to
put these passages before you, for on the principle that actions speak
louder than words, I find that in describing a man's character it is
better to give examples of his ways than to speak in broad and general
terms. Had I said that he was fierce in ins religion and subject to
strange fits of piety, the words might have made little impression
upon you; but when I tell you of his attack upon the officers in the
tanning-yard, and his summoning us down in the dead of the night to
await the second coming, you can judge for yourselves the lengths to
which his belief would carry him. For the rest, he was an excellent man
of business, fair and even generous in his dealings, respected by all
and loved by few, for his nature was too self-contained to admit of much
affection. To us he was a stern and rigid father, punishing us heavily
for whatever he regarded as amiss in our conduct. He bad a store of such
proverbs as 'Give a child its will and a whelp its fill, and neither
will strive,' or 'Children are certain cares and uncertain comforts,'
wherewith he would temper my mother's more kindly impulses. He could not
bear that we should play trick-track upon the green, or dance with the
other children upon the Saturday night.$A

My chambers were up stairs at No.--Wall-street.  At one end they looked
upon the white wall of the interior of a spacious sky-light shaft,
penetrating the building from top to bottom.  This view might have been
considered rather tame than otherwise, deficient in what landscape
painters call "life."  But if so, the view from the other end of my
chambers offered, at least, a contrast, if nothing more.  In that
direction my windows commanded an unobstructed view of a lofty brick
wall, black by age and everlasting shade; which wall required no
spy-glass to bring out its lurking beauties, but for the benefit of all
near-sighted spectators, was pushed up to within ten feet of my window
panes.  Owing to the great height of the surrounding buildings, and my
chambers being on the second floor, the interval between this wall and
mine not a little resembled a huge square cistern.$H

Ginger Nut, the third on my list, was a lad some twelve years old.  His
father was a carman, ambitious of seeing his son on the bench instead of
a cart, before he died.  So he sent him to my office as student at law,
errand boy, and cleaner and sweeper, at the rate of one dollar a week.
He had a little desk to himself, but he did not use it much.  Upon
inspection, the drawer exhibited a great array of the shells of various
sorts of nuts.  Indeed, to this quick-witted youth the whole noble
science of the law was contained in a nut-shell.  Not the least among
the employments of Ginger Nut, as well as one which he discharged with
the most alacrity, was his duty as cake and apple purveyor for Turkey
and Nippers.  Copying law papers being proverbially dry, husky sort of
business, my two scriveners were fain to moisten their mouths very often
with Spitzenbergs to be had at the numerous stalls nigh the Custom
House and Post Office.  Also, they sent Ginger Nut very frequently for
that peculiar cake--small, flat, round, and very spicy--after which he
had been named by them.  Of a cold morning when business was but dull,
Turkey would gobble up scores of these cakes, as if they were mere
wafers--indeed they sell them at the rate of six or eight for a
penny--the scrape of his pen blending with the crunching of the crisp
particles in his mouth.  Of all the fiery afternoon blunders and
flurried rashnesses of Turkey, was his once moistening a ginger-cake
between his lips, and clapping it on to a mortgage for a seal.  I came
within an ace of dismissing him then.  But he mollified me by making an
oriental bow, and saying--"With submission, sir, it was generous of me
to find you in stationery on my own account."$H

At first Bartleby did an extraordinary quantity of writing.  As if long
famishing for something to copy, he seemed to gorge himself on my
documents.  There was no pause for digestion.  He ran a day and night
line, copying by sun-light and by candle-light.  I should have been
quite delighted with his application, had he been cheerfully
industrious.  But he wrote on silently, palely, mechanically.
It is, of course, an indispensable part of a scrivener's business to
verify the accuracy of his copy, word by word.  Where there are two or
more scriveners in an office, they assist each other in this
examination, one reading from the copy, the other holding the original.
It is a very dull, wearisome, and lethargic affair.  I can readily
imagine that to some sanguine temperaments it would be altogether
intolerable.  For example, I cannot credit that the mettlesome poet
Byron would have contentedly sat down with Bartleby to examine a law
document of, say five hundred pages, closely written in a crimpy hand.$H

But he vouchsafed no reply.  I pondered a moment in sore perplexity.
But once more business hurried me.  I determined again to postpone the
consideration of this dilemma to my future leisure.  With a little
trouble we made out to examine the papers without Bartleby, though at
every page or two, Turkey deferentially dropped his opinion that this
proceeding was quite out of the common; while Nippers, twitching in his
chair with a dyspeptic nervousness, ground out between his set teeth
occasional hissing maledictions against the stubborn oaf behind the
screen.  And for his (Nippers') part, this was the first and the last
time he would do another man's business without pay.$H

Hanging from the beam,
  Slowly swaying (such the law),
Gaunt the shadow on your green,
  Shenandoah!
The cut is on the crown
(Lo, John Brown),
And the stabs shall heal no more.
Hidden in the cap
  Is the anguish none can draw;
So your future veils its face,
  Shenandoah!
But the streaming beard is shown
(Weird John Brown),
The meteor of the the war.
Misgivings.
(1860.)
  When ocean-clouds over inland hills
    Sweep storming in late autumn brown,
  And horror the sodden valley fills,
    And the spire falls crashing in the town,
  I muse upon my country's ills--
  The tempest bursting from the waste of Time
On the world's fairest hope linked with man's foulest crime.
  Nature's dark side is heeded now--
    (Ah! optimist-cheer disheartened flown)--
  A child may read the moody brow
    Of yon black mountain lone.
  With shouts the torrents down the gorges go,
  And storms are formed behind the storm we feel:
The hemlock shakes in the rafter, the oak in the driving keel.
The Conflict of Convictions.[1]
(1860-1.)$H

O the clammy cold November,
  And the winter white and dead,
And the terror dumb with stupor,
  And the sky a sheet of lead;
And events that came resounding
  With the cry that _All was lost_,
Like the thunder-cracks of massy ice
  In intensity of frost--
Bursting one upon another
  Through the horror of the calm.
  The paralysis of arm
In the anguish of the heart;
And the hollowness and dearth.
  The appealings of the mother
  To brother and to brother
Not in hatred so to part--
And the fissure in the hearth
  Growing momently more wide.
Then the glances 'tween the Fates,
  And the doubt on every side,
And the patience under gloom
In the stoniness that waits
The finality of doom.$H

The March into Virginia,
Ending in the First Manassas.
(July, 1861.)
Did all the lets and bars appear
  To every just or larger end,
Whence should come the trust and cheer?
  Youth must its ignorant impulse lend--
Age finds place in the rear.
  All wars are boyish, and are fought by boys,
The champions and enthusiasts of the state:
  Turbid ardors and vain joys
    Not barrenly abate--
  Stimulants to the power mature,
    Preparatives of fate.
Who here forecasteth the event?
What heart but spurns at precedent
And warnings of the wise,
Contemned foreclosures of surprise?$H

Ball's Bluff.
A Reverie.
(October, 1861.)
One noonday, at my window in the town,
  I saw a sight--saddest that eyes can see--
  Young soldiers marching lustily
      Unto the wars,
With fifes, and flags in mottoed pageantry;
    While all the porches, walks, and doors
Were rich with ladies cheering royally.
They moved like Juny morning on the wave,
  Their hearts were fresh as clover in its prime
  (It was the breezy summer time),
      Life throbbed so strong,
How should they dream that Death in a rosy clime
    Would come to thin their shining throng?
Youth feels immortal, like the gods sublime.
Weeks passed; and at my window, leaving bed,
  By night I mused, of easeful sleep bereft,
  On those brave boys (Ah War! thy theft);
      Some marching feet
Found pause at last by cliffs Potomac cleft;
    Wakeful I mused, while in the street
Far footfalls died away till none were left.
Dupont's Round Fight.
(November, 1861.)$H

It was the old Brigadier who was talking in the cafe. I have seen a great many cities,
my friends. I would not dare to tell you how many I have entered as a conqueror
with eight hundred of my little fighting devils clanking and jingling behind me. The
cavalry were in front of the Grande Armee, and the Hussars of Conflans were in front of
the cavalry, and I was in front of the Hussars. But of all the cities which we visited
Venice is the most ill-built and ridiculous. I cannot imagine how the people who laid it
out thought that the cavalry could manoeuvre. It would puzzle Murat or Lassalle to bring a
squadron into that square of theirs. For this reason we left Kellermann's heavy brigade and
also my own Hussars at Padua on the mainland. But Suchet with the infantry held the town,
and he had chosen me as his aide-de-camp for that winter, because he was pleased about
the affair of the Italian fencing-master at Milan. The fellow was a good swordsman, and
it was fortunate for the credit of French arms that it was I who was opposed to him. Besides,
he deserved a lesson, for if one does not like a prima donna's singing one can always be silent,
but it is intolerable that a public affront should be put upon a pretty woman. So the sympathy
was all with me, and after the affair had blown over and the man's widow had been pensioned
Suchet chose me as his own galloper, and I followed him to Venice, where I had the strange
adventure which I am about to tell you.$A

You have not been to Venice? No, for it is seldom that the French travel. We were great
travellers in those days. From Moscow to Cairo we had travelled everywhere, but we went in
larger parties than were convenient to those whom we visited, and we carried our passports in
our limbers. It will be a bad day for Europe when the French start travelling again, for they
are slow to leave their homes, but when they have done so no one can say how far they will go
if they have a guide like our little man to point out the way. But the great days are gone and
the great men are dead, and here am I, the last of them, drinking wine of Suresnes and telling
old tales in a cafe.Thus I was able to admire the pictures in Venice, and to know the names of
the great men, Michael Titiens, and Angelus, and the others, who had painted them. No one can
say that Napoleon did not admire them also, for the very first thing which he did when he captured
the town was to send the best of them to Paris. We all took what we could get, and I had two pictures for my share.
One of them, called “Nymphs Surprised,” I kept for myself, and the other, “Saint Barbara,” I sent as a present for my mother.
It must be confessed, however, that some of our men behaved very badly in this matter of the
statues and the pictures. The people at Venice were very much attached to them, and as to the four
bronze horses which stood over the gate of their great church, they loved them as dearly as if they
had been their children. I have always been a judge of a horse, and I had a good look at these ones,
but I could not see that there was much to be said for them. They were too coarse-limbed for light
cavalry charges and they had not the weight for the gun-teams.$A

“Have you got him?” asked a voice, in Italian.
My monster gave a laugh and kicked the sack in which I lay.
“Here he is,” said he.
“They are waiting.” He added something which I could not understand.
“Take him, then,” said my captor. He raised me in his arms, ascended some steps,
and I was thrown down upon a hard floor. A moment later the bars creaked and the key
whined once more. I was a prisoner inside a house.
From the voices and the steps there seemed now to be several people round me. I understand
Italian a great deal better than I speak it, and I could make out very well what they were saying.
“You have not killed him, Matteo?”
“What matter if I have?”
“My faith, you will have to answer for it to the tribunal.”
“They will kill him, will they not?”
“Yes, but it is not for you or me to take it out of their hands.”
“Tut! I have not killed him. Dead men do not bite, and his cursed teeth met in my thumb as I pulled the sack over his head.”
“He lies very quiet.”
“Tumble him out and you will find that he is lively enough.”
The cord which bound me was undone and the sack drawn from over my head. With my eyes closed I lay motionless upon the floor.
“By the saints, Matteo, I tell you that you have broken his neck.”
“Not I. He has only fainted. The better for him if he never came out of it again.”
I felt a hand within my tunic.$A

He was, indeed, a formidable old man, for his white beard bristled with fury and he barked out the
little sentences like a savage hound. For my part I could have told him that his pictures would be
safe in Paris, that his horses were really not worth making a fuss about, and that he could see heroes—I
say nothing of saints—without going back to his ancestors or even moving out of his chair. All this I could
 have pointed out, but one might as well argue with a Mameluke about religion. I shrugged my shoulders and said nothing.
“The prisoner has no defence,” said one of my masked judges.
“Has any one any observation to make before judgment is passed?” The old man glared round him at the others.
“There is one matter, your Excellency,” said another.
“It can scarce be referred to without reopening a brother's wounds, but I would remind you that there is a very
particular reason why an exemplary punishment should be inflicted in the case of this officer.”
“I had not forgotten it,” the old man answered.
“Brother, if the tribunal has injured you in one direction, it will give you ample satisfaction in another.”
The young man who had been pleading when I entered the room staggered to his feet.
“I cannot endure it,” he cried. “Your Excellency must forgive me. The tribunal can act without me. I am ill.
I am mad.” He flung his hands out with a furious gesture and rushed from the room.
“Let him go! Let him go!” said the president. “It is, indeed, more than can be asked of flesh
and blood that he should remain under this roof. But he is a true Venetian, and when the first
 agony is over he will understand that it could not be otherwise.”
I had been forgotten during this episode, and though I am not a man who is accustomed to being overlooked I
 should have been all the happier had they continued to neglect me. But now the old president glared at me
 again like a tiger who comes back to his victim.$A

 It was the early winter, and banks of fading fern sloped down to the winding road. It is a
 bleak place this Dartmoor, wild and rocky—a country of wind and mist.
I felt as I walked that it is no wonder Englishmen should suffer from the spleen. My own heart was
heavy within me, and I sat upon a rock by the wayside looking out on the dreary view with my thoughts
full of trouble and foreboding. Suddenly, however, as I glanced down the road, I saw a sight which drove
everything else from my mind, and caused me to leap to my feet with a cry of astonishment and anger.
Down the curve of the road a phaeton was coming, the pony tearing along at full gallop. Within was the
very lady whom I had come to meet. She lashed at the pony like one who endeavours to escape from some
pressing danger, glancing ever backward over her shoulder. The bend of the road concealed from me what
it was that had alarmed her, and I ran forward not knowing what to expect.
The next instant I saw the pursuer, and my amazement was increased at the sight. It was a gentleman in
the red coat of an English fox-hunter, mounted on a great grey horse. He was galloping as if in a race,
and the long stride of the splendid creature beneath him soon brought him up to the lady's flying carriage.
I saw him stoop and seize the reins of the pony, so as to bring it to a halt. The next instant he was deep
in talk with the lady, he bending forward in his saddle and speaking eagerly, she shrinking away from him
as if she feared and loathed him.$A

In the first place, there is one thing which I can assure you. In all his career Napoleon never had
so splendid an army as that with which he took the field for that campaign. In 1813 France was exhausted.
 For every veteran there were five children—Marie Louises, as we called them; for the Empress had busied
  herself in raising levies while the Emperor took the field. But it was very different in 1815. The
  prisoners had all come back—the men from the snows of Russia, the men from the dungeons of Spain, the
men from the hulks in England.
These were the dangerous men, veterans of twenty battles, longing for their old trade, and with hearts
filled with hatred and revenge. The ranks were full of soldiers who wore two and three chevrons, every
chevron meaning five years' service. And the spirit of these men was terrible. They were raging,
furious, fanatical, adoring the Emperor as a Mameluke does his prophet, ready to fall upon their own
bayonets if their blood could serve him. If you had seen these fierce old veterans going into battle,
with their flushed faces, their savage eyes, their furious yells, you would wonder that anything could
stand against them. So high was the spirit of France at that time that every other spirit would have
quailed before it; but these people, these English, had neither spirit nor soul, but only solid, immovable
beef, against which we broke ourselves in vain. That was it, my friends! On the one side, poetry, gallantry,
self-sacrifice—all that is beautiful and heroic. On the other side, beef. Our hopes, our ideals, our
dreams—all were shattered on that terrible beef of Old England.$A